
# Dictated notes

Three Django apps in a trenchcoat
Conceptually a Django app comprised of around three components a URL gets routed to a particular Django view which may display one or more Django forms and May view or updates via crud one or more Django models. The model system is what represents the structure of the database in the ORM or object relationship manager For radioactive eight. We need to represent a Log entry or event that describes which base or location a patrol is currently at and what time that happens and which intelligence ( associated with that particular base) that patrol answered if any and whether their answer was correct. The structure for this Log entry or event can then be relatively simply represented on a form which requests the necessary information in the order in which it makes sense to ask for it over the radio aside from this database structure most of the rest of radioactive smart reside in the view or form logic which retrieve previously collected information about a patrol and use it to predict the information currently being entered to reduce friction and cognitive load on the software operator.


The logic behind brownie is a little bit more in depth the first step for scratch that one of the first steps in making Brown sea viable and adequately straightforward as a user experience was integrating it with Scouts Victoria's member database while we could have collected all of the data we required from scratch This would have resulted in duplication and inconsistencies with information and increasing the tax surface of BrownC because we would have needed more information stored locally than we otherwise do as mentioned earlier the information we can retrieve from Scouts Victoria's membership database (known as extranet) includes a members First last full and preferred name their phone number and email address there H as an integer and the groups and roles they have or are a part of within scouting. With this information we can construct our own view of the group, district, and region hierarchy within Scouts Victoria And use that as a permission model to grant Leaders access to information about their youth members which are part of their group or formation which is equivalent to the access they already have as part of extranet. Because this information is mapped into extranet using the Scouts Victoria membership number we can trivially retrieve additional information later on if necessary using our Scouts Victoria membership database access on a case by case basis.


The Star Trek survival website in addition to tying into the information provided by the previous two apps also provided information about Star Trek survivals various missions also known as activities. Each activity was potentially limited to a certain age range and was associated with various award scheme achievements and Star Trek episodes across various Star Trek TV series or movies. Each attendee or regiment for Star Trek survival was asked which of these missions they wanted to complete and those preferences were used by radioactive to prioritise those missions in the destination list of the radioactive interface.

Let's go through a typical user flow from a youth member registering for Star Trek survival right through to attending the event and receiving feedback about their completed admissions. A youth member browsers to Star Trek survival.Tech/events and signs in with their membership number date of birth and surname. Member is offered a list of tickets appropriate for their age group and selects the one they would like to purchase subsequently completing the information request form and their emission preferences before registering and receiving an invoice. Behind-the-scenes our admin team collect the list of attending members and building lists of patrols and units With geographically local Scout groups. Any litre of a Scout group district or region can login to the registration system at any time and see a list of members attending from their formation as well as which patrols they have been assigned to if any on arrival to Star Trek survival each member checks in and is marked as on site within the event management system of BrownC they are then shown to their campsite with the rest of their patrol and unit. When activities begin each patrol is allocated to their first activity and shown its location on their printed map they are also given their Radio the patrol heads off to their base and when they get there, they use their radio to communicate with staff Fleet command also known as headquarters and the patrol Gives staff command their name and current location. We confirm their patrols name and location and verify that they are checking in to their base and record this information using the radioactive eight event form the patrol then completes their activity and uses their radio to alert staff command once they are done Staff command then check the patrol out of that activity and assign them a new destination activity based on patrol preferences that activities distance from their current location that bases current capacity and whether or not we would like to take a break for lunch or dinner. This system also allows us to take activities or missions out of the rotation if that Activities Facilitators are unavailable or otherwise not ready to run the activity. An unavailable activity is completely opaque to attendees because they are simply not sent to that activity this is a big win over traditional activity rotations where groups are sent to activities in a circuit and therefore require alterations to the circuit Rather than being able to re-allocate members on the fly.


So I want to talk about some of the user experience improvements we've been able to make to these various systems as they have evolved a lot of this has been particularly possible because as we have been in the process of running events I have been on hand. Literally writing updates to the software as it is being used and deploying changes on the flight . This is meant that we have been able to get real-time feedback from the systems users as to what is working and what would be improved so that has allowed me to adapt the system with user experience in mind as we go? I think the first thing to say on this point is The first large scale use for radioactive was a statewide event where we had between one and 200 youth members using the system or rather playing the game at a time and we had ventures which is to say 15 to 17-year-old kids or young adult adults running this activity via radio activate as Leaders we were expecting to run this activity with Ventura Support for the first three or so days of this 10 day event before the venture is had a sufficient handle on the system to take charge in reality we had ventures wanting to sit in the driver seat by the first afternoon I'm feeling quite competent and comfortable doing so.
Some other improvements included randomly allocating destination bases and current base intelligence questions based on which basis the patrol had previously completed and which intelligence questions they had answered. This reduces the cognitive load of the operator.
Because Star Trek survival is run over such a large camping area and distances between two bases could be up to a 10 or 15 minute walk it was prudent to take the walking time of participants between bases into account especially given some of these participants are only five years old and have very little legs . From its inception radioactive has always supported storing the geospatial coordinates of a base in its database one of the most recent additions however has included using open street map track Data to compute time and distance estimates between each base and every other base and use that as part of the heuristic to pick a patrols most logical next base. The process for this isn't super slick right now as I have to manually import this route Data once I have calculated it but with some extra time it would be much easier to automate on the assumption that each base was accessible Using a path which exists on open street map which I have learned is not always the case.
As part of Star Trek survival one of the other simple but extremely beneficial features was adding a couple of different dashboards which dynamically updated to show bass capacity and patrol locations as these were displayed on large TVs in the staff command control Centre such that operators and passes by alike could see at a glance where each patrol was and when we had lost heard from them.

The big thing that I have always wanted to do  for radioactive he's to display a dynamically updating web map with every base location and the number of or list of patrols at each base. Unfortunately the priority of this particular feature has not pushed it up to the top of my queue as yet and I am not sufficiently experienced creating web maps for it to be a straightforward process even though I am confident that I know which tools to use for the job.

Other future potential improvements include tightening up our authentication and authorisation framework. Currently we use a system that has been hacked together to use several pieces of information and individual knows about themselves; namely their surname date of birth and membership number as sufficient evidence of their identity to grant them access to do baselevel tasks such as registered for an event. This was not deemed sufficient for leaders to be able to see registration details of youth members so we needed to add an additional check involving sending a password reset link to the Leaders Scouts Victoria registered email address. Ideally, we would like Scouts Victoria to provide an authentication framework that we could tie into. this possibility is on the horizon as Scouts Victoria rolls out office 365 across the organisation but has a few hurdles before that system will be in operation.
